

===== PAGE 1 =====

Explanation-Guided Backdoor Poisoning Attacks Against Malware Classiﬁers
Giorgio Severi
Northeastern University
Jim Meyer∗
Xailient Inc.
Scott Coull
FireEye Inc.
Alina Oprea
Northeastern University
Abstract
Training pipelines for machine learning (ML) based malware
classiﬁcation often rely on crowdsourced threat feeds, expos-
ing a natural attack injection point. In this paper, we study
the susceptibility of feature-based ML malware classiﬁers to
backdoor poisoning attacks, speciﬁcally focusing on challeng-
ing “clean label” attacks where attackers do not control the
sample labeling process. We propose the use of techniques
from explainable machine learning to guide the selection
of relevant features and values to create effective backdoor
triggers in a model-agnostic fashion. Using multiple refer-
ence datasets for malware classiﬁcation, including Windows
PE ﬁles, PDFs, and Android applications, we demonstrate
effective attacks against a diverse set of machine learning
models and evaluate the effect of various constraints imposed
on the attacker. To demonstrate the feasibility of our backdoor
attacks in practice, we create a watermarking utility for Win-
dows PE ﬁles that preserves the binary’s functionality, and
we leverage similar behavior-preserving alteration method-
ologies for Android and PDF ﬁles. Finally, we experiment
with potential defensive strategies and show the difﬁculties of
completely defending against these attacks, especially when
the attacks blend in with the legitimate sample distribution.
1 Introduction
The endpoint security industry has increasingly adopted ma-
chine learning (ML) based tools as integral components of
their defense-in-depth strategies. In particular, classiﬁers us-
ing features derived from static analysis of binaries are com-
monly used to perform fast, pre-execution detection and pre-
vention on the endpoint, and often act as the ﬁrst line of de-
fense for end users [2, 3, 5]. Concurrently, we are witnessing
a corresponding increase in the attention dedicated to adver-
sarial attacks against malicious software (malware) detection
models. The primary focus in this area has been the develop-
ment of evasion attacks [13, 25, 62], where the adversary’s
∗The author contributed to this work while at FireEye Inc.
goal is to alter the data point at inference time in order to
induce a misclassiﬁcation. However, in this paper, we focus
on the insidious problem of poisoning attacks [14], which
attempt to inﬂuence the ML training process, and in partic-
ular backdoor [28] poisoning attacks, where the adversary
places a carefully chosen pattern into the feature space such
that the victim model learns to associate its presence with
a class of the attacker’s choice. While evasion attacks have
previously been demonstrated against both open-source [4]
and commercial malware classiﬁers [7], backdoor poisoning
offers attackers an attractive alternative that requires more
computational effort at the outset, but which can result in
a generic evasion capability for a variety of malware sam-
ples and target classiﬁers. These backdoor attacks have been
shown to be extremely effective when applied to computer
vision models [21, 38] without requiring a large number of
poisoned examples, but their applicability to the malware clas-
siﬁcation domain, and feature-based models in general, has
not yet been investigated.
Poisoning attacks are a danger in any situation where a
possibly malicious third party has the ability to tamper with a
subset of the training data. For this reason, they have come
to be considered as one of the most relevant threats to pro-
duction deployed ML models [35]. We argue that the current
training pipeline of many security vendors provides a natural
injection point for such attacks. Security companies, in fact,
often rely on crowd-sourced threat feeds [1, 6, 8, 9] to provide
them with a large, diverse stream of user-submitted binaries to
train their classiﬁers. This is chieﬂy due to the sheer quantity
of labeled binaries needed to achieve satisfactory detection
performance (tens to hundreds of millions of samples), and
speciﬁcally the difﬁculty in adequately covering the diverse
set of goodware observed in practice (e.g., custom binaries,
multiple versions of popular software, software compiled with
different compilers, etc.).
One complication in this scenario, however, is that the
labels for these crowd-sourced samples are often gener-
ated by applying several independent malware detection en-
gines [30], which would be impossible for an attacker to con-
1
arXiv:2003.01031v3  [cs.CR]  11 Jan 2021

===== PAGE 2 =====

Users submit binaries to crowdsourced threat intelligence platforms for evaluation. Attackersubmits poisoned benign files.
The platforms collect data and assign labels.
The company obtains the outsourced data and uses it in the training of a ML malware classifier.
Attackercan now submit malware containing the same backdoor. The model will be fooled into recognizing it as benign.
Gathering & LabelingOutsourced dataProprietary data
Preprocessing & Feature Extraction
Model training
ML malware classifier
Figure 1: Overview of the attack on the training pipeline for ML-based malware classiﬁers.
trol. Therefore, in this paper, we study clean-label backdoor
attacks [55, 65] against ML-based malware classiﬁers by de-
veloping a new, model-agnostic backdoor1 methodology. Our
attack injects backdoored benign samples in the training set of
a malware detector, with the goal of changing the prediction
of malicious software samples watermarked with the same
pattern at inference time. To decouple the attack strategy from
the speciﬁcs of the ML model, our main insight is to lever-
age tools from ML explainability, namely SHapley Additive
exPlanations (SHAP) [40], to select a small set of highly ef-
fective features and their values for creating the watermark.
We evaluate our attack against a variety of machine learning
models trained on widely-used malware datasets, including
EMBER (Windows executables) [11], Contagio (PDFs) [57],
and Drebin (Android executables) [12]. Additionally, we ex-
plore the impact of various real-world constraints on the ad-
versary’s success, and the viability of defensive mechanisms
to detect the attack. Overall, our results show that the attack
achieves high success rates across a number of scenarios and
that it can be difﬁcult to detect due to the natural diversity
present in the goodware samples. Our contributions are:
(i) We highlight a natural attack point which, if left
unguarded, may be used to compromise the training of
commercial, feature-based malware classiﬁers.
(ii) We propose the ﬁrst general, model-agnostic method-
ology for generating backdoors for feature-based
classiﬁers using explainable machine learning tech-
niques.
(iii) We demonstrate that explanation-guided backdoor
attacks are feasible in practice by developing a back-
dooring utility for Windows PE ﬁles, and using similar
functionality-preserving methods for Android and PDF
ﬁles. We show that these methods can satisfy multiple,
realistic adversarial constraints.
(iv) Finally, we evaluate mitigation techniques and demon-
strate the challenges of fully defending against stealthy
poisoning attacks.
1We will refer to the combination of features and values used to induce
the misclassiﬁcation, as trigger, watermark, or simply backdoor.
2 Background
Malware Detection Systems. We can separate automated
malware detection approaches into two broad classes based
on their use of static or dynamic analysis. Dynamic analysis
systems execute binary ﬁles in a virtualized environment, and
record the behavior of the sample looking for indicators of
malicious activities [10, 31, 41, 54, 63]. Meanwhile, static ana-
lyzers process executable ﬁles without running them, extract-
ing the features used for classiﬁcation directly from the binary
and its meta-data. With the shift towards ML based classiﬁers,
this second class can be further divided into two additional
subcategories: feature-based detectors [11, 42, 52, 53, 56], and
raw-binary analyzers [22, 34, 48]. We focus our attacks on
classiﬁers based on static features due to their prevalence in
providing pre-execution detection and prevention for many
commercial endpoint protection solutions [2, 3, 5].
Adversarial Attacks. Adversarial attacks against machine
learning models can also be broadly split into two main cate-
gories: evasion attacks, where the goal of the adversary is to
add a small perturbation to a testing sample to get it misclassi-
ﬁed; poisoning attacks, where the adversary tampers with the
training data, either injecting new data points, or modifying
existing ones, to cause misclassiﬁcations at inference time.
The former has been extensively explored in the context of
computer vision [17], and previous research efforts have also
investigated the applicability of such techniques to malware
classiﬁcation [13, 27, 33, 59, 70]. The latter has been itself
divided into different subcategories. Availability poisoning
attacks aim at degrading the overall model accuracy [14, 29].
Targeted poisoning attacks induce the model to misclassify
a single instance at inference time [55, 60]. Finally, inBack-
door attacks, the adversary’s goal is to inject a backdoor (or
watermark) pattern in the learned representation of the model,
which can be exploited to control the classiﬁcation results. In
this context, a backdoor is a speciﬁc combination of features
and selected values that the victim model is induced, during
training, to associate with a target class. The same watermark,
when injected into a testing data point, will trigger the desired
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

prediction. Backdoor attacks were introduced in the context
of neural networks for image recognition [28]. Clean-label
variants of the attacks [55, 65] prevent the attacker from ma-
nipulating the original label of the poisoning data.
SHapley Additive exPlanations. Research in explainable
machine learning has proposed multiple systems to interpret
the predictions of complex models. SHapley Additive ex-
Planations (SHAP) [39, 40], based on the cooperative game
theory concept of Shapley values, have the objective of ex-
plaining the ﬁnal value of a prediction by attributing a value
to each feature based on its contribution to the prediction.
The SHAP framework has been shown to subsume several
earlier model explanation techniques, including LIME [49]
and Integrated Gradients [61].
In particular, these model explanation frameworks provide
a notion of how important each feature value is to the de-
cision made by the classiﬁer, and which class it is pushing
that decision toward. To accomplish this task, the explanation
frameworks train a surrogate linear model of the form:
g(x) = φ0 +
M
∑
j=1
φ jx j (1)
based on the input feature vectors and output predictions
of the model, and then use the coefﬁcients of that model to
approximate the importance and ‘directionality’ of the feature.
Here, x is the sample, x j is the jth feature for sample x, and φ j
is the contribution of feature x j to the model’s decision. The
SHAP framework distinguishes itself by enforcing theoretical
guarantees on the calculation of the feature contributions in a
model agnostic way.
3 Problem Statement and Threat Model
A typical training pipeline for a ML-based malware classiﬁer,
summarized in Figure 1, commonly starts with the acquisi-
tion of large volumes of labeled binaries from third-party
threat intelligence platforms. These platforms allow users (in-
cluding attackers) to submit samples, which are labeled by
running pools of existing antivirus (A V) engines on the binary
ﬁles. Companies can then acquire the labeled data from the
platforms. The screening process of the incoming ﬂow, how-
ever, is made remarkably onerous by both the sheer quantities
involved, and the intrinsic difﬁculty of the task, requiring spe-
cialized personnel and tooling. This outsourced data can also
be combined with small sets of proprietary, vetted binary ﬁles
to create a labeled training data set. The training process in-
cludes a feature extraction step (in this case static analysis of
PE ﬁles), followed by the ML algorithm training procedure.
The trained malware classiﬁers are then deployed in the wild,
and applied to new binary ﬁles to generate a label, malicious
(malware) or benign (goodware).
Threat intelligence data comes with a set of labels deter-
mined by third-party A V analyzers, that are not under direct
control of the attacker. This condition makes the clean-label
backdoor approach a de-facto necessity, since label-ﬂipping
would imply adversarial control of the labeling procedure.
The adversary’s goal is thus to generate backdoored benign
binaries, which will be disseminated through these labeling
platforms, and will poison the training sets for downstream
malware classiﬁers. Once the models are deployed, the ad-
versary would simply introduce the same watermark in the
malicious binaries before releasing them, thus making sure
the new malware campaign will evade the detection of the
backdoored classiﬁers. In our exploration of this attack space,
we start by targeting static, feature-based malware classiﬁers
for Windows Portable Executable (PE) ﬁles. Then, in order to
show the generality of our methodology, we expand our focus
to other common ﬁle formats, such as PDFs and Android
applications.
3.1 Threat Model
A large fraction of the backdoor attack literature adopts the
BadNets threat model [28], which deﬁned: (i) an “Outsourced
Training Attack”, where the adversary has full control over the
training procedure, and the end user is only allowed to check
the training using a held-out validation dataset; and (ii) a
“Transfer Learning Attack”, in which the user downloads a
pre-trained model and ﬁne-tunes it. We argue that, in the
context we are examining, this threat model is difﬁcult to
apply directly. Security companies are generally risk-averse
and prefer to either perform the training in-house, or outsource
the hardware while maintaining full control over the software
stack used during training. Similarly, we do not believe the
threat model from Liu et al. [38], where the attacker partially
retrains the model, applies in this scenario.
Adversary’s Goals. Similarly to most backdoor poisoning
settings, the attacker goal is to alter the training procedure,
such that the resulting backdoored classiﬁer,Fb, differs from
a cleanly trained classiﬁerF, where F,Fb : X ∈ Rn → {0,1}.
An ideal Fb has the exact same response to a clean set of
inputs X as F, whereas it generates an adversarially-chosen
prediction, yb, when applied to backdoored inputs, Xb. These
goals can be summarized as:
Fb(X) = F(X); F(Xb) = y; Fb(Xb) = yb ̸= y
While in multi-class settings, such as image recognition,
there is a difference between targeted attacks, where the in-
duced misclassiﬁcation is aimed towards a particular class,
and non-targeted attacks, where the goal is solely to cause an
incorrect prediction, this difference is lost in malware detec-
tion. Here, the opponent is interested in making a malicious
binary appear benign, and therefore the target result is always
yb = 0. We use class 0 for benign software, and class 1 for
malicious software. To make the attack undetectable, the ad-
versary wishes to minimize both the size of the poison set and
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

Attacker Knowledge Control
Feature Set Model Architecture Model Parameters Training Data Features Labels
unrestricted
data_limited
transfer
black_box
constrained
Table 1: Summary of attacker scenarios. Fullness of the circle indicates relative level of knowledge or control.
the footprint of the trigger (counted as the number of modiﬁed
features).
Adversary’s Capabilities. We can characterize the adversary
by the degree of knowledge and control they have on the com-
ponents of the training pipeline, as shown in Table 1. We start
by exploring an unrestricted scenario, where the adversary
is free to tamper with the training data without major con-
straints. To avoid assigning completely arbitrary values to the
watermarked features, we always limit our attacker’s modiﬁca-
tion to the set of values actually found in the benign samples
in training. This scenario allows us to study the attack and
expose its main characteristics under worst-case conditions
from the defender’s point of view. We also examine various
constraints on the attacker, such as restricted access to the
training set (data_limited), limited access to the target model
(transfer), and limited knowledge of the model architecture
(black_box). Finally, it is relevant to consider a scenario, con-
strained, where the adversary is strictly constrained in both
the features they are allowed to alter and the range of values
to employ. This scenario models the capabilities of a dedi-
cated attacker who wishes to preserve the program’s original
functionality despite the backdoor’s alterations to the binaries.
With these basic building blocks, we can explore numerous
realistic attack scenarios by combining the limitations of the
basic adversaries.
4 Explanation-Guided Backdoor Attacks
In a backdoor poisoning attack, the adversary leverages con-
trol over (a subset of) the features to induce misclassiﬁcations
due to the presence of poisoned values in those feature dimen-
sions. Intuitively, the attack creates an area of density within
the feature subspace containing the trigger, and the classiﬁer
adjusts its decision boundary to accommodate that density of
poisoned samples. The backdoored points ﬁght against the in-
ﬂuence of surrounding non-watermarked points, as well as the
feature dimensions that the attacker does not control, in adjust-
ing the decision boundary. However, even if the attacker only
controls a relatively small subspace, they can still inﬂuence
the decision boundary if the density of watermarked points is
sufﬁciently high, the surrounding data points are sufﬁciently
sparse, or the watermark occupies a particularly weak area of
the decision boundary where the model’s conﬁdence is low.
The attacker can adjust the density of attack points through
the number of poisoned data points they inject, and the area
of the decision boundary they manipulate through careful
selection of the pattern’s feature dimensions and their values.
Therefore, there are two natural strategies for developing
successful backdoors: (1) search for areas of weak conﬁdence
near the decision boundary, where the watermark can over-
whelm existing weak evidence; or (2) subvert areas that are
already heavily oriented toward goodware so that the density
of the backdoored subspace overwhelms the signal from other
nearby samples. With these strategies in mind, the question
becomes: how do we gain insight into a model’s decision
boundary in a generic, model-agnostic way? We argue that
model explanation techniques, like SHapley Additive exPlana-
tions (SHAP), are a natural way to understand the orientation
of the decision boundary relative to a given sample. In our task
positive SHAP values indicate features that are pushing the
model toward a decision of malware, while negative SHAP
values indicate features pushing the model toward a goodware
decision. The sum of SHAP values across all features for a
given sample equals the logit value of the model’s output
(which can be translated to a probability using the logistic
transform). One interpretation of the SHAP values is that they
approximate the conﬁdence of the decision boundary along
each feature dimension, which gives us the model-agnostic
method necessary to implement the two intuitive strategies
above. That is, if we want low-conﬁdence areas of the decision
boundary, we can look for features with SHAP values that
are near-zero, while strongly goodware-oriented features can
be found by looking for features with negative contributions.
Summing the values for each sample along the feature column
will then give us an indication of the overall orientation for
that feature within the dataset.
4.1 Building Blocks
The attacker requires two building blocks to implement a back-
door: feature selectors and value selectors. Feature selection
narrows down the attacker’s watermark to a subspace meeting
certain desirable properties, while value selection chooses the
speciﬁc point in that space. Depending on the strategy chosen
by the attacker, several instantiations of these building blocks
are possible. Here, we will outline the SHAP-based methods
used in our attacks, however other instantiations (perhaps to
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

support alternative attack strategies) may also be possible.
Feature Selection. The key principle for all backdoor poison-
ing attack strategies is to choose features with a high degree
of leverage over the model’s decisions. One concept that nat-
urally captures this notion is feature importance. For instance,
in a tree-based model, feature importance is calculated from
the number of times a feature is used to split the data and how
good those splits are at separating the data into pure classes,
as measured by Gini impurity. Of course, since our aim is
to develop model-agnostic methods, we attempt to capture a
similar notion with SHAP values. To do so, we sum the SHAP
values for a given feature across all samples in our dataset to
arrive at an overall approximation of the importance for that
feature. Since SHAP values encode both directionality (i.e.,
class preference) and magnitude (i.e., importance), we can
use these values in two unique ways.
LargeSHAP: By summing the individual SHAP values, we
combine the individual class alignments of the values for
each sample to arrive at the average class alignment for that
feature. Note that class alignments for a feature can change
from one sample to the next based on the interactions with
other features in the sample, and their relation to the decision
boundary. Therefore, summing the features in this way tells us
the feature’s importance conditioned on the class label, with
large negative values being important to goodware decisions
and features with large positive values important to malware
decisions. Features with near-zero SHAP values, while they
might be important in a general sense, are not aligned with a
particular class and indicate areas of weak conﬁdence.
LargeAbsSHAP: An alternative approach is to ignore the di-
rectionality by taking the absolute value of the SHAP values
before summing them. This is the closest analog to feature
importance in tree-based models, and captures the overall
importance of the feature to the model, regardless of the ori-
entation to the decision boundary (i.e., which class is chosen).
Value Selection. Once we have identiﬁed the feature sub-
space to embed the trigger in, the next step is to choose the
values that make up the trigger . However, due to the strong
semantic restrictions of the binaries, we cannot simply choose
any arbitrary value for our backdoors. Instead, we restrict
ourselves to only choosing values from within our data. Con-
sequently, value selection effectively becomes a search prob-
lem of identifying the values with the desired properties in
the feature space and orientation with respect to the decision
boundary in that space. According to the attack strategies
described above, we want to select these values based on a
notion of their density in the subspace – either selecting points
in sparse, weak-conﬁdence areas for high leverage over the
decision boundary or points in dense areas to blend in with
surrounding background data. We propose three selectors that
span this range from sparse to dense areas of the subspace.
MinPopulation: To select values from sparse regions of the
subspace, we can simply look for those values that occur
with the least frequency in our dataset. The MinPopulation
selector ensures both that the value is valid with respect to
the semantics of the binary and that, by deﬁnition, there is
only one or a small number of background data points in
the chosen region, which provides strong leverage over the
decision boundary.
CountSHAP: On the opposite side of the spectrum, we seek
to choose values that have a high density of goodware-aligned
data points, which allows our watermark to blend in with the
background goodware data. Intuitively, we want to choose
values that occur often in the data (i.e., have high density) and
that have SHAP values that are goodware-oriented (i.e., large
negative values). We combine these two components in the
following formula:
argmin
v
α
( 1
cv
)
+ β( ∑
xv∈X
Sxv ) (2)
where α, β are parameters that can be used to control the in-
ﬂuence of each component of the scoring metric, cv is the
frequency of value v across the feature composing the trigger,
and ∑xv∈X Sxv sums the SHAP values assigned to each compo-
nent of the data vectors in the training set X, having the value
xv. In our experiments, we found that setting α = β = 1.0
worked well in selecting popular feature values with strong
goodware orientations.
CountAbsSHAP: One challenge with the CountSHAP ap-
proach is that while the trigger might blend in well with sur-
rounding goodware, it will have to ﬁght against the natural
background data for control over the decision boundary. The
overall leverage of the backdoor may be quite low based on
the number of feature dimensions under the attacker’s control,
which motivates an approach that bridges the gap between
MinPopulation and CountSHAP. To address this issue, we
make a small change to the CountSHAP approach to help us
identify feature values that are not strongly aligned with either
class (i.e., it has low conﬁdence in determining class). As with
the LargeAbsSHAP feature selector, we can accomplish this
by simply summing the absolute value of the SHAP values,
and looking for values whose sum is closest to zero
argmin
v
α
( 1
cv
)
+ β( ∑
xv∈X
|Sxv |) (3)
4.2 Attack Strategies
With the feature selection and value selection building blocks
in hand, we now propose two algorithms for combining them
to realize the intuitive attack strategies above.
Independent Selection. Recall that the ﬁrst attack strategy
is to search for areas of weak conﬁdence near the decision
boundary, where the watermark can overwhelm existing weak
evidence. The best way of achieving this objective across mul-
tiple feature dimensions is through Independent selection of
the backdoor, thereby allowing the adversary to maximize the
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

Algorithm 1: Greedy combined selection.
Data: N = trigger size;
X = Training data matrix;
S = Matrix of SHAP values computed on training data;
Result: w = mapping of features to values.
1 begin
2 w ← −map();
3 selectedFeats ← −/0;
4 Slocal ← −S;
5 feats ← −X.features;
6 Xlocal ← −X;
7 while len(selectedFeats) < N do
8 feats = feats \ selectedFeats;
// Pick most benign oriented (negative) feature
9 f ← −LargeSHAP(Slocal , feats, 1, goodware);
// Pick most benign oriented (negative) value of f
10 v ← −CountSHAP(Slocal , Xlocal , f, goodware);
11 selectedFeats.append( f );
12 w[ f ] = v;
// Remove vectors without selected ( f ,v) tuples
13 mask ← −Xlocal [:, f ] == v;
14 Xlocal = Xlocal [mask];
15 Slocal = Slocal [mask];
16 end
17 end
effect of the attack campaign by decoupling the two selection
phases and individually picking the best combinations. For
our purposes, the best approach using our building blocks is
to select the most important features using LargeAbsSHAP
and then select values using either MinPopulation or Count-
AbsSHAP. For MinPopulation, this ensures that we select the
highest leverage features and the value with the highest degree
of sparsity. Meanwhile, with the CountAbsSHAP approach,
we try to balance blending the attack in with popular values
that have weak conﬁdence in the original data. While we ﬁnd
that this attack strongly affects the decision boundary, it is
also relatively easy to mitigate against because of how unique
the watermarked data points are, as we will show in Section 7.
Greedy Combined Selection. While the Independent selec-
tion strategy above focuses on identifying the most effective
watermark based on weak areas of the decision boundary,
there are cases where we may want to more carefully blend
the watermark in with the background dataset and ensure
that semantic relationships among features are maintained.
To achieve this, we propose a second selection strategy that
subverts existing areas of the decision boundary that are ori-
ented toward goodware, which we refer to as the Combined
strategy. In the Combined strategy, we use a greedy algo-
rithm to conditionally select new feature dimensions and their
values such that those values are consistent with existing
goodware-oriented points in the attacker’s dataset, as shown
in Algorithm 1. We start by selecting the most goodware-
oriented feature dimension using the LargeSHAP selector
and the highest density, goodware-oriented value in that di-
Model F1 Score FP rate FN rate Dataset
LightGBM 0.9861 0.0112 0.0167 EMBER
EmberNN 0.9911 0.0067 0.0111 EMBER
Random Forest 0.9977 0.0025 0.0020 Contagio
Linear SVM 0.9942 0.0026 0.07575 Drebin
Table 2: Performance metrics for the clean models.
mension using the CountSHAP selector. Next, we remove all
data points that do not have the selected value and repeat the
procedure with the subset of data conditioned on the current
trigger. Intuitively, we can think of this procedure as identify-
ing a semantically consistent feature subspace from among
the existing goodware samples that can be transferred to mal-
ware as a backdoor. Since we are forcing the algorithm to
select a pattern from among the observed goodware samples,
that trigger is more likely to naturally blend in with the origi-
nal data distribution, as opposed to the Independent strategy,
which may produce backdoors that are not ‘near’ any natural
feature subspace. Indeed, we have found that this Combined
process results in hundreds or thousands of background points
with trigger sizes of up to 32 features in the case of Windows
PE ﬁles. By comparison, theIndependent algorithm quickly
separates the watermark from all existing background points
after just three or four feature dimensions.
Moreover, since the selected backdoor pattern occupies a
subspace with support from real goodware samples, we can
be assured that the combination of values selected in that
subspace are consistent with one another and with the seman-
tics of the original problem space. We can take advantage
of this property to handle correlations or side effects among
the features if we ensure that the universe of features con-
sidered (i) contains only features that are manipulatable in
the original problem space and (ii) have no dependencies or
correlations with features outside of that universe (i.e., seman-
tic relationships are contained within the subspace). This is
an assumption also found in previous work on adversarial
evasion attacks against malware classiﬁers [26, 27].
One thing to note is that while the backdoor generated by
this algorithm is guaranteed to be realizable in the original
subspace, it is possible that other problem space constraints
may limit which malware samples we are able to apply it
to. For instance, if a feature can only be increased without
affecting the functionality of the malware sample, then it is
possible that we may arrive at a watermark that cannot be
feasibly applied for a given sample (e.g., ﬁle size can only be
increased). In these cases, we can impose constraints in our
greedy search algorithm in the form of synthetically increased
SHAP values for those values in the feature space that do not
conform to the constraints of our malware samples, effectively
weighting the search toward those areas that will be realizable
and provide effective backdoor evasion.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

(a) LightGBM target
 (b) EmberNN target
Figure 2: Accuracy of the backdoor model over backdoored malicious samples forunrestricted attacker. Lower Acc(Fb,Xb) is the
result of stronger attacks. For LightGBM, trigger size is ﬁxed at 8 features and we vary the poisoning rate (left). For EmberNN,
we ﬁx the poisoning rate at 1% and vary the trigger size (right).
Figure 3: transfer Acc(Fb,Xb) for both models (other model
used as surrogate), as function of poisoned data percentage.
5 Experimental Attack Evaluation
EMBER [11] is a representative public dataset of malware
and goodware samples used for malware classiﬁcation, re-
leased together with a LightGBM gradient boosting model,
that achieves good binary classiﬁcation performance. The
EMBER2 dataset consists of 2,351-dimensional feature vec-
tors extracted from 1.1 million Portable Executable (PE) ﬁles
for the Microsoft Windows operating system. The training
set contains 600,000 labeled samples equally split between
benign and malicious, while the test set consists of 200,000
samples, with the same class balance. All the binaries cat-
egorized as malicious were reported as such by at least 40
antivirus engines on VirusTotal [9].
2In this work we use EMBER 1.0
Following Anderson et al. [11], we used default parameters
for training LightGBM (100 trees and 31 leaves per tree). We
also considered state-of-the-art neural networks for the task
of malware classiﬁcation, and, given the feature-based nature
of our classiﬁcation task, we experimented with different ar-
chitectures of Feed-Forward networks. We selected a model,
EmberNN, composed of four densely connected layers, the
ﬁrst three using ReLU activation functions, and the last one
ending with a Sigmoid activation (a standard choice for binary
classiﬁcation). The ﬁrst three dense layers are interleaved by
Batch Normalization layers and a50% Dropout rate is applied
for regularization during training to avoid overﬁtting. Perfor-
mance metrics for both clean models (before the attacks are
performed) on the EMBER test set (Table 2) are comparable,
with EmberNN performing slightly better than the publicly
released LightGBM model.
In our experiments, we are especially interested in the fol-
lowing indicators for the backdoored model:
AAAcccccc(((FFFbbb,,,XXX bbb))): Accuracy of the backdoored model on water-
marked malware samples. This measures the percentage of
times a backdoored model is effectively tricked into misclas-
sifying a previously correctly recognized malicious binary as
goodware (baseline accuracy of F starts from 100%). There-
fore, the primary goal of the attacker is to reduce this value.
AAAcccccc(((FFFbbb,,,XXX))): Accuracy of the backdoored model on the clean
test set. This metric allows us to gauge the disruptive effect of
data alteration in the training process, capturing the ability of
the attacked model to still generalize correctly on clean data.
FFFPPPbbb: False positives (FP) of the backdoored model. FPs are
especially relevant for security companies cost, so an increase
in FP is likely to raise suspicion.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

5.1 Attack Performance
Here, we analyze theunrestricted attack effectiveness by vary-
ing the trigger size, the poison rate, and the attack strategies.
Targeting LightGBM. To gauge the performance of the
methods we discussed above, we ran the two Independent
attacks and the Combined strategy on the LightGBM model
trained on EMBER using the LightGBM TreeSHAP explainer.
Plotting attack success rates for an 8-feature trigger, Figure 2a
clearly highlights the correlation between increasing poison
pool sizes and lower Acc(Fb,Xb). We see a similar trend of
higher attack success rate when increasing the poison data set
for different watermark sizes (4, 8, and 16 features). Detailed
results for all three strategies are included in Appendix A.
Interestingly, the SHAP feature selection allows the adversary
to use a relatively small trigger, 8 features out of 2,351 in
Figure 2a, and still obtain powerful attacks. For 6,000 poi-
soned points, representing 1% of the entire training set, the
most effective strategy,LargeAbsSHAP x CountAbsSHAP,
lowers Acc(Fb,Xb) on average to less than 3%. Even at much
lower poisoning rates ( 0.25%), the best attack consistently
degrades the performance of the classiﬁer on backdoored
malware to worse than random guessing. All the strategies
induce small overall changes in the FPb under 0.001, with
marginally larger increases correlated to larger poison sizes.
We also observe minimal changes in Acc(Fb,X), on average
below 0.1%.
Comparing the three attack strategies, we observe that the
Independent attack composed by LargeAbsSHAP and Count-
AbsSHAP induces consistently high misclassiﬁcation rates. It
is also important to mention here that the Combined strategy
is, as expected, remarkably stealthier. We compared the accu-
racy of the clean model on the clean benign samples, against
its accuracy of their respective backdoored counterparts, and
observed very small differences across all attack runs. In con-
clusion, we observe that the attack is extremely successful at
inducing targeted mis-classiﬁcation in the LightGBM model,
while maintaining good generalization on clean data, and low
false positive rates.
Targeting EmberNN. Running the same series of attacks
against EmberNN using the GradientSHAP explainer, we im-
mediately notice that the Neural Network is generally more
resilient to our attacks. Moreover, here the effect of trigger size
is critical. Figure 2b shows the progression of accuracy loss
over the watermarked malicious samples with the increase in
trigger size, at a ﬁxed1% poisoning rate. For example, under
the most effective strategy, with a trigger size of 128 features,
Acc(Fb,Xb) becomes on average 0.75%, while Acc(Fb,Xb)
averages 5.05% at 32 features. A critical element that distin-
guishes the three strategies on EmberNN, is the difference
between the accuracy of the clean model over the clean and
backdoored benign samples. While, the other tracked met-
rics show a behavior similar to the case of LightGBM, good
generalization on clean data, with Acc(Fb,X) close to the
original 99.11% in most cases, and low false positives in-
crease (≈ 0.1 − 0.2% average increase in FPb), a clean Em-
berNN model often fails almost completely in recognizing
backdoored benign points as goodware. Here, the Combined
strategy emerges as a clear “winner,” being both very effective
in inducing misclassiﬁcation, and, simultaneously, minimiz-
ing the aforementioned difference, with an average absolute
value of ≈ 0.3%. Interestingly, we also observed that the
attack performance on the NN model is more strongly cor-
related with the size of the backdoor trigger than with the
poison pool size, resulting in small (0.5%) injection volumes
inducing appreciable misclassiﬁcation rates.
5.2 Limiting the Attacker
We consider here a transfer attacker without access to the
model. This threat model prevents the attacker from being
able to compute the SHAP values for the victim model, there-
fore, the backdoor has to be generated using a surrogate (or
proxy) model sharing the same feature space. We simulated
this scenario by attempting a backdoor transferability experi-
ment between our target models. Fixing the trigger size to 16
features we attacked LightGBM with a backdoor generated
by the Combined strategy using the SHAP values extracted
from an EmberNN surrogate model. Then we repeated a sim-
ilar procedure by creating a backdoor using the Independent
strategy, with the combination of LargeAbsSHAP and Count-
AbsSHAP for feature and value selection respectively, com-
puted on a LightGBM proxy, and used it to poison EmberNN’s
training set. The Acc(Fb,Xb) loss for both scenarios is shown
in Figure 3. The empirical evidence observed supports the
conclusion that our attacks are transferable both ways. In par-
ticular, we notice a very similar behavior in both models as
we saw in the unrestricted scenario, with LightGBM being
generally more susceptible to the induced misclassiﬁcation.
In that case, the trigger generated using the surrogate model
produced a ≈ 82.3% drop in accuracy on the backdoored
malware set, for a poison size of 1% of the training set.
Lastly, we evaluate the scenario in which the attacker has
access to only a small subset of clean training data and uses
the same model architecture as the victim (i.e., data_limited).
We perform this experiment by training a LightGBM model
with 20% of the training data and using it to generate the
trigger, which we then used to attack the LightGBM model
trained over the entire dataset. Using theIndependent strategy
with LargeAbsSHAP and CountAbsSHAP over 16 features
and a 1% poison set size, we noticed very little difference
compared to the same attack where the SHAP values are
computed over the entire training set (≈ 4% ∆ Acc(Fb,Xb)).
6 Problem-Space Considerations
In the previous section, we explored model-agnostic attack
strategies when the attacker has full control of the features
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

(a) LightGBM target
 (b) EmberNN target
Figure 4: Accuracy of the backdoor model over watermarked malicious samples. Lower Acc(Fb,Xb) is the result of stronger
attacks. The watermark uses the subset of 17 features of EMBER, modiﬁable by theconstrained adversary.
(a) Random Forest classiﬁer on Contagio data.
 (b) Linear SVM classiﬁer on Drebin data.
Figure 5: 50 attack runs for Contagio and 10 for Drebin, using the Combined strategy, with a 30-features trigger.
and can change their values at will. A constrained attacker
has to expend non-trivial effort to ensure that the backdoor
generated in feature-space does not break the semantics or
otherwise compromise the functionality of binaries in the
problem-space [47]; that is backdoored goodware must main-
tain the original label and watermarked malware retain its
malicious functionality.
6.1 Windows PEs
We implemented a backdooring utility using the peﬁle [19]
library to create a generic tool that attempts to apply a given
watermark to arbitrary Windows binaries. Creating this utility
in a sufﬁciently general way required specialized knowledge
of the ﬁle structure for Windows Portable Executable (PE)
ﬁles, in particular when adding sections to the binaries. Doing
so required extending the section table with the appropriate
sections, names, and characteristics, which in turn meant re-
locating structures that follow the section table, such as data
directories and the sections themselves, to allow for arbitrary
increases in the number of sections added.
We also encountered several challenges that required us
to drop certain features and consider dependencies among
features that restrict the values they can take on. First, we
realized that the vast majority of the features in EMBER are
based on feature hashing, which is often used to vectorize ar-
bitrarily large spaces into a ﬁxed-length vector. For example,
strings uncovered in the binary may be hashed into a small
number of buckets to create a ﬁxed-number of counts. Given
the preimage resistance of the hash function, directly manip-
ulating these features by tampering with the binary would
be extremely difﬁcult, and consequently we discard all hash-
based features, leaving us with just 35 directly-editable, non-
hashed features. Next, we considered dependencies among
the non-hashed features. As it turns out, many of the fea-
tures are derived from the same underlying structures and
properties of the binary, and may result in conﬂicting water-
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

marks that cannot be simultaneously realized. For example,
the num_sections and num_write_sections features are related
because each time we add a writeable section, we necessarily
increase the total number of sections. To handle these depen-
dencies, we remove any features whose value is impacted
by more than one other feature (e.g., num_sections). This
allows us to keep the maximal number of features without
solving complex constraint optimization problems. The last
challenge arose from the question of how to handle natural
constraints of the problem space, such as cases where the
watermark might require us to remove URLs or reduce the
ﬁle size. Here, the attacker has two choices: reduce the set
of ﬁles that can be successfully watermarked or reduce the
effectiveness of the watermark by adding constraints to the
search algorithm that ensure maximal applicability, as shown
in Section 4. Due to the large number of available Windows
PE samples, we decided it was best for the attacker to sacri-
ﬁce the samples, rather than lose attack effectiveness. Later,
we will show the opposite case for Android malware, where
imposing constraints on the watermark was the preferable
solution.
After reducing our set of features based on the above crite-
ria, we are left with 17 features that our generic watermarking
utility can successfully manipulate on arbitrary Windows bi-
naries. Examples of backdoor patterns can be found in Table 4,
Appendix A.2. As we will see, despite the signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in the space of available features, our proposed attack
strategies still show signiﬁcant effectiveness. While develop-
ing the watermarking utility was challenging, we believe it is
well within the capabilities of a determined attacker, and can
subsequently be reused for a variety of attack campaigns.
Attack Efﬁcacy. As shown in Figure 4, the effectiveness of
the attack is slightly decreased when the backdoor trigger is
generated using only the 17 manipulable features supported by
our watermarking utility. Such a constrained adversary, is, as
expected, strictly less powerful than the unrestricted attacker
we explored in Section 5. On the other hand, despite the strong
limitations introduced to ease practical implementation, we
argue that the average accuracy loss is still extremely relevant
given the security critical application. Moreover, if we allow
the poison size to grow to 2% of the overall training set, we
obtain Acc(Fb,Xb) levels comparable with the unrestricted at
1% poison size on LightGBM.
To explore additional realistic scenarios, we combined the
limitation over features control with lack of access to the
original model, constrained - transfer. As in Section 5.2, we
generated the watermark using a surrogate model, with the
most effective transfer strategy we identiﬁed before, but this
time restricted to the controllable features. We observed an
average Acc(Fb,Xb) of 54.53% and 56.76% for LightGBM
and EmberNN respectively. An even weaker and stealthier
attacker could be obtained combining the characteristics of
the previous adversary with a limited knowledge of the train-
ing data and the use of the Combined strategy. We evaluate
the effect of this constrained - transfer- data_limited adver-
sary, with a backdoor computed using an EmberNN surrogate,
with access to only 20% of the training set and applied to a
LightGBM victim. Despite the extreme limitations imposed
on the attacker, the effect on the model is still signiﬁcant,
with decreases in accuracy on points containing the trigger
ranging from ≈ 10.8% at 1% poisoning, up to ≈ 40% for a
4% poisoning rate.
Lastly, we looked at the constrained - black_box scenario,
where we produced the SHAP values for only the manipula-
ble features using the SHAP KernelExplainer, which operates
purely by querying the model as a black-box. We target Light-
GBM, with the LargeAbsSHAP x CountAbsSHAP strategy,
poisoning 1% of the training set. The resulting model ex-
hibits an average Acc(Fb,Xb) of 44.62%, which makes this
attacker slightly weaker than one having access to model-
speciﬁc SHAP explainers. It is relevant to note here, that the
adversary has to spend a signiﬁcant amount of computation
time to use the SHAP KernelExplainer.
Behavior Preservation. We randomly selected the 100 good-
ware and 100 malware binaries from our dataset and poisoned
each of them with the backdoor for the LightGBM and Em-
berNN models, resulting in a total of 200 watermarked bina-
ries for each model. To determine the watermark effects on
the binaries’ functionality, we run each sample in a dynamic
analysis sandbox, which uses a variety of static, dynamic, and
behavioral analysis methods to determine whether a binary
is malicious. This experiment helps evaluate three important
aspects of our attack when applied in the real world: (i) the
ability to keep the original labels on watermarked goodware,
(ii) the ability to maintain the original malicious functionality
of the watermarked malware, and (iii) the impact of semantic
restrictions on the features the adversary can use to carry out
the poisoning. The original and backdoored binaries were
submitted to a dynamic analysis environment with an execu-
tion timeout of 120 seconds. Table 5, in Appendix A.2, shows
the results of our experiments. In the case of the LightGBM
and EmberNN watermarks, both goodware and malware have
similar numbers of failed watermarking attempts due to the
physical constraints on the binaries, with the most prevalent
reason (>90%) being binaries that were too large for the se-
lected size watermark. For those ﬁles that were successfully
watermarked, we observed that goodware always maintained
its original benign label, while malware retained its mali-
cious functionality in 61-66% of the cases. We also scanned
our watermarked binaries with ESET and Norton AntiVirus
signature-based antivirus engines, similar to those used by
crowdsourced threat intelligence feeds, and found that none
of the goodware changed labels due to the presence of our
backdoor. Overall, this indicates that an attacker could use up
to 75% of the observed goodware and 47% of the observed
malware in these threat intelligence feeds to launch their back-
door poisoning attack. This is sufﬁcient in real-world attacks
as the adversary needs a small percentage of poisoned binaries
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

to execute the attack. Finally, it is important to point out that
our evaluation here focused on an adversary using commodity
goodware and malware. However, an advanced attacker may
produce their own software to better align with the chosen
watermark values and maximize the attack impact.
6.2 Other Datasets
PDF ﬁles and Android applications have been the object of a
large body of research on malware classiﬁcation and classi-
ﬁer evasion. Therefore, we focused on these two domains as
examples for the adaptability of our explanation-based attack.
PDF Files. We worked with the Contagio 3 PDF data, con-
sisting of 10,000 samples evenly distributed between benign
and malicious, with 135-dimensional feature vectors extracted
according to PDFRate [57] speciﬁcation. To ensure our modi-
ﬁcations were behavior-preserving, we developed a Python 3
port of the feature editor released4 with Mimicus [58]. This
tool allowed us to parse the PDF ﬁles, apply the desired back-
door pattern, and read back a new feature vector after the
poisoning to account for possible side effects, such as alter-
ations in various size-based features.
Unfortunately, during our experimentation we ran into sev-
eral bugs in the Mimicus feature editor that lead to inconsis-
tent application of our otherwise valid watermark to the PDFs.
In particular, these issues forced us to reduce our trigger pat-
tern to only 30 of the 35 features reported as modiﬁable in the
paper, and to restrict our poisoning pool to only those ﬁles that
were correctly backdoored. Fixing these issues is beyond the
scope of this work, but despite these limitations we were still
able to poison enough samples to mount successful attacks.
Android Applications. In the Android domain, we used the
well-studied Drebin [12] dataset containing 5,560 malicious
and 123,453 benign apps, represented by Boolean vectors indi-
cating which of the over 545,000 statically extracted features
are present in the application. Such a large space of features
is divided into 8 logical subsets, S1 − S4 being characteristics
of the Android manifest ﬁle, andS5 −S8 being extracted from
the disassembled code.
To ensure no loss of functionality was inadvertently sus-
tained as side effect of the trigger application, we borrowed
the technique speciﬁed by Grosse et al. [26, 27]. First, we
restricted ourselves to only altering features belonging to sub-
sets S1 and S2, representing the list of hardware components
and the list of permissions requested by the application, re-
spectively. Both these subsets belong to the manifest class
of features and can be modiﬁed by changing a single line in
the manifest ﬁle. Second, we forced our backdoor to be ex-
clusively additive, meaning that no feature could be removed
from an application as result of the poisoning.
3http://contagiodump.blogspot.com/
4https://github.com/srndic/mimicus
Other advanced (and computationally expensive) tech-
niques may also be used to increase the number of manipula-
ble features available to our attack strategy while still ensuring
behavior preservation, such as organ harvesting [47] for ad-
versarial Android malware or behavioraloracles [69] for PDF
ﬁles. We believe that the improvement of feature-space to
problem-space mapping methods, will greatly improve the
effectiveness of explanation-guided poisoning attacks.
Attack Efﬁcacy. Having observed how our Combined strat-
egy is both stealthy (more on this in Section 7), and especially
adept at generating behavior preserving backdoors, we em-
ployed it for our experiments on the Contagio and Drebin
datasets. In both cases, we use the original model architec-
ture proposed in the literature, therefore, we test our attack
on a Random Forest classiﬁer for the PDF ﬁles, and a Linear
Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁer for the Android
applications.
Figure 5a shows the reduction in accuracy of the poisoned
Random Forest induced by our constrained adversary. It is
interesting to observe that, probably due to the small size
of the dataset combined with the necessity of limiting the
poisoning pool to only the PDF ﬁles correctly modiﬁed by the
editor utility, there appears to be a large amount of variance
in the attack effectiveness at lower poison percentages. These
effects fade away with larger poisoning pools. Overall, the
attack is generally very successful, inducing, for instance, an
average 21.09% Acc(Fb,Xb), at 1.5% poisoning rate.
Applying the explanation attack to the Android data proved
somewhat more challenging due to the sparsity of the fea-
ture space. To handle the dimensionality issue, we ﬁrst used
L1 regularized logistic regression to select a subset of 991
features, then we trained a surrogate LightGBM mode and
used the surrogate to compute the SHAP values. This cor-
responds to a transfer-constrained adversary. A 30-feature
backdoor thus computed was then applied to the original
545K-dimensional vectors used to train the Linear SVM. Fig-
ure 5b shows the effect of the poisoning on the accuracy of the
model on backdoored malware. For instance, at 2% poisoning
rate, the attack lowers the model accuracy on backdoored
samples to 42.9% on average We also observed minimal loss
of Acc(Fb,X) within 0.03%, and change in FPb, less than
0.08%, on average.
7 Mitigation
Recently, researchers started tackling the problem of defend-
ing against backdoor attacks [20, 37, 64, 67]. Nearly all exist-
ing defensive approaches, however, are speciﬁcally targeted
at computer vision Deep Neural Networks, and assume ad-
versaries that actively tamper with the training labels. These
limitations make them hard to adapt to the class of model-
agnostic, clean-label attacks we are interested in. We discuss
here representative related work.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

Target Strategy Acc(Fb,Xb) Mitigation New Acc(Fb,Xb) Poisons Goodware
(after attack) (after defense) Removed Removed
LightGBM
LargeAbsSHAP x
MinPopulation 0.5935
HDBSCAN 0.7422 3825 102251
Spectral Signature 0.7119 962 45000
Isolation Forest 0.9917 6000 11184
LargeAbsSHAP x
CountAbsSHAP 0.5580
HDBSCAN 0.7055 3372 93430
Spectral Signature 0.6677 961 44999
Isolation Forest 0.9921 6000 11480
Combined Feature
Value Selector 0.8320
HDBSCAN 0.8427 1607 115282
Spectral Signature 0.7931 328 45000
Isolation Forest 0.8368 204 8927
EmberNN
LargeAbsSHAP x
MinPopulation 0.4099
HDBSCAN 0.3508 3075 137597
Spectral Signature 0.6408 906 45000
Isolation Forest 0.9999 6000 14512
LargeAbsSHAP x
CountAbsSHAP 0.8340
HDBSCAN 0.5854 2499 125460
Spectral Signature 0.8631 906 45000
Isolation Forest 0.9999 6000 15362
Combined Feature
Value Selector 0.8457
HDBSCAN 0.8950 1610 120401
Spectral Signature 0.9689 904 45000
Isolation Forest 0.8030 175 13289
Table 3: Mitigation results for both LightGBM and EmberNN. All attacks were targeted towards the 17 controllable features (see
Section 6), with a 1% poison set size, 6000 backdoored benign samples. We showAcc(Fb,Xb) for the backdoored model, and
after the defense is applied. We also include number of poisoned and goodware points ﬁltered out by the defensive approaches.
Tran et al. [64] propose a defensive method based on spec-
tral signatures, which relies on detecting two ε-spectrally sep-
arable subpopulations based on SVD decomposition. Chen
et al. [20] rely on the representation learned by the CNN and
perform k-means clustering on the activations of the last con-
volutional layer. The defense of Liu et al. [37] is based on
combining network ﬁne tuning and neuron pruning, making
it speciﬁc to neural networks. Finally, NeuralCleanse [67]
is based on the intuition that in a backdoored model, the
perturbation necessary to induce a misclassiﬁcation towards
the targeted class should be smaller than that required to ob-
tain different labels. This approach was designed considering
multi-class classiﬁcation problem, as encountered in image
recognition, and the suggested ﬁltering and pruning mitigation
are neural-network speciﬁc.
Considered Defensive Approaches.According to our threat
model, the defender is assumed to: (i) have access to the
(poisoned) training data; (ii) have access to a small set of
clean labeled data. This common assumption in adversarial
ML ﬁts nicely with the context since security companies often
have access to internal, trusted, data sources; and (iii) know
that the adversary will target the most relevant features.
We evaluate three mitigation strategies over a reduced fea-
ture space obtained by selecting a ﬁxed number (32) of the
most important features. First, a state-of-the-art defensive
strategy, spectral signatures [64], which we adapt by comput-
ing the singular value decomposition of the benign samples
over the new feature space. Then, as in the original paper,
we compute the outlier score by multiplying the top right
singular vector and we ﬁlter out the samples with the highest
15% scores. Second, hierarchical density-based clustering,
(HDBSCAN) [16], inspired by Chen et al’s [20] use of k-
means for defensive clustering over neuron activations. We
borrow the idea, using HDBSCAN instead, with the intuition
that watermarked samples form a subspace of high density
in the reduced feature space, and generate a tight cluster. Ad-
ditionally, HDBSCAN does not require a ﬁxed number of
clusters, but has two other parameters that control the cluster
density (minimum size of a cluster, set at 1% of the training
benign data, 3000 points, and minimum number of samples
to form a dense region, set at 0.5%, 600 points). As in [20],
we compute Silhouette scores on the resulting clusters, to
obtain an estimate of the intra-cluster similarity of a sample
compared to points from its nearest neighboring cluster, and
ﬁlter out samples from each cluster with a probability related
to the cluster silhouette score. Third, isolation forest [36], an
algorithm for unsupervised anomaly detection based on iden-
tifying rare and different points instead of building a model of
a normal sample. The intuition here is that such an anomaly
detection approach might identify the watermarked samples
as outliers due to their similarity compared to the very diverse
background points. We experiment with default parameters
of Isolation Forest.
Results of Mitigation Strategies. Table 3 shows the effect
of these three mitigation strategies over the different models
and attack strategies. Two main takeaways emerge from these
empirical results. First, the Isolation Forest, trained on the
reduced feature space, is often capable of correctly isolating
all the backdoored points with relatively low false positives.
Note that this happens exclusively when an Isolation Forest
is trained on the transformed dataset (reduced to most im-
portant features). The same algorithm applied in the original
feature space detects only a tiny fraction of the backdoored
points (≈ 1%), with similar results obtained also on Drebin
(0%) and Contagio (12.5%), thus reinforcing the observation
in [64] that the subpopulations are not sufﬁciently separable
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

in the original feature space. Second, none of the mitigation
approaches was able to isolate the points attacked with water-
marks produced with the Combined strategy on PE ﬁles. This
conﬁrms that the Combined attack strategy is much more
stealthy compared to both Independent strategies.
We note that the proposed mitigations are only a ﬁrst prac-
tical step in defending against clean-label backdoor attacks
in a model-agnostic setting. We leave a deeper investigations
of more general defensive methods, as a topic of future work.
Protecting ML systems from adversarial attacks is an intrin-
sically hard problem [18]. We argue that defending against
our backdoor attacks is extremely challenging due to the com-
bined effect of the small subpopulation separability induced
by clean-label attacks, and the difﬁculty of distinguishing
dense regions generated by the attack from other dense re-
gions naturally occurring in diverse sets of benign binaries.
8 Related Work
An early line of research introduced by Perdisci et al. [46] and
Newsome et al. [45] demonstrated methods for polluting au-
tomated polymorphic worm detectors such as Polygraph [44].
The ﬁrst [46] introduced purposely crafted noise in the traces
used for signature generation to prevent the generation of
useful signatures; the second [45] proposed red herring at-
tacks, where the goal of the adversary is to force the generated
system to rely on spurious features for classiﬁcation, which
will then be excluded from the evading sample. Red herring
attacks are particularly interesting for us, being the ﬁrst to
suggest that an adversary does not necessarily need control
over data labels in order to cause failures in the downstream
classiﬁer, thus foreshadowing clean-label poisoning. Suc-
cessive work by Venkataraman et al. [66] generalizes these
results by providing lower bounds on the number of mistakes
made by a signature generation algorithm based on conjunc-
tions of boolean features. Theoretical bounds on poisoning
attacks against an online centroid anomaly detection method
have subsequently been analyzed by Kloft and Laskov [32]
in the context of network intrusion detection. Concurrently,
researchers started to analyze possible countermeasures to
poisoning attempts against anomaly detection systems de-
ployed to discover abnormal patterns in network traces. Cretu
et al. [23] developed a methodology to sanitize training data
based on the output of an ensemble of micro models, trained
on small portions of the data, combined through simple vot-
ing schemes. Rubinstein et al. [51] later proposed to leverage
methods from robust statistics to minimize the effect of small
poison quantities on network trafﬁc anomaly detectors based
on Principal Component Analysis.
More recent research by Biggio et al. [14] brought to light
the problem of poisoning attacks against modern machine
learning models by proposing an availability attack based
on gradient ascent against support vector machines. Succes-
sive work [15], demonstrated the relevance of ML poisoning
in the domain of malware classiﬁcation by targeting Mal-
heur [50], a malware behavioral clustering tool. Later research
by Xiao et al. [68] showed that feature selection methods, like
LASSO, ridge regression, and elastic net, were susceptible
to small poison sizes. Gradient-based poisoning availability
attacks have been shown against regression [29] and neural
networks [43], and the transferability of these attacks has
been demonstrated [24]. Recently, Suciu et al. [60] proposed
a framework for deﬁning attacker models in the poisoning
space, and developed StingRay, a multi-model target poison-
ing attack methodology.
Backdoor attacks were introduced by Gu et al. in Bad-
Nets [28], identifying a supply chain vulnerability in modern
machine learning as-a-service pipelines. Liu et al. [38] ex-
plored introducing trojan triggers in image recognition Neu-
ral Networks, without requiring access to the original train-
ing data, by partially re-training the models. Later works by
Turner et al. [65] and Shafahi et al. [55] further improved over
the existing attacks by devising clean-label strategies.
9 Discussion and Conclusion
With this work we begin shedding light on new ways of im-
plementing clean-label backdoor attacks, a threat vector that
we believe will only grow in relevance in the coming years.
We showed how to conduct backdoor poisoning attacks that
are model-agnostic, do not assume control over the labeling
process, and can be adapted to very restrictive adversarial
models. For instance, an attacker with the sole knowledge
of the feature space can mount a realistic attack by injecting
a relatively small pool of poisoned samples (1% of training
set) and induce high misclassiﬁcation rates in backdoored
malware samples. Additionally, we designed the Combined
strategy that creates backdoored points in high-density regions
of the legitimate samples, making it very difﬁcult to detect
with common defenses. Based on our exploration of these
attacks, we believe explanation-guided attack strategies could
also be applicable to other feature-based models, outside of
the security domain.
Finally, there are some limitations of this work that we
would like to expose. First, the attacks we explored rely on
the attacker knowing the feature space used by the victim
model. While this assumption is partially justiﬁed by the
presence of natural features in the structure of executable
ﬁles, we consider the development of more generic attack
methodologies, which do not rely on any knowledge from the
adversary’s side, as an interesting future research direction.
Second, designing a general mitigation method, particularly
against our stealthy Combined attack strategy, remains a chal-
lenging problem for future work. Lastly, adaptation of these
attacks to other malware classiﬁcation problems that might
rely on combining static and dynamic analysis is also a topic
of future investigation.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Jeff Johns for his detailed feedback
on a draft of this paper and many discussions on backdoor
poisoning attacks, and the anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments and valuable suggestions. We thank Fire-
Eye for sponsoring research done at Northeastern University
for this project. The work done at Northeastern University
was also partially sponsored by the U.S. Army Combat Capa-
bilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory
and was accomplished under Cooperative Agreement Number
W911NF-13-2-0045 (ARL Cyber Security CRA). The views
and conclusions contained in this document are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁ-
cial policies, either expressed or implied, of the Combat Capa-
bilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory
or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized
to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes
notwithstanding any copyright notation
References
[1] AlienVault - Open Threat Exchange. https : / /
otx.alienvault.com/.
[2] CylancePROTECT Malware Execution Con-
trol. https : / / www .cylance.com / content /
dam / cylance / pdfs / feature - focus /
Feature_Focus_PROTECT_Malware_Control.pdf.
[3] Detonating a bad rabbit: Windows Defender Antivirus
and layered machine learning defenses. https://
www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2017/12/11/
detonating- a- bad- rabbit- windows- defender-
antivirus - and - layered - machine - learning -
defenses/.
[4] Machine Learning Static Evasion Competition.
https : / / www .elastic.co / blog / machine -
learning-static-evasion-competition .
[5] MalwareGuard: FireEye’s Machine Learn-
ing Model to Detect and Prevent Malware.
https : / / www .fireeye.com / blog / products -
and- services/2018/07/malwareguard- fireeye-
machine - learning - model - to - detect - and -
prevent-malware.html.
[6] MetaDefender Cloud | Homepage. https : / /
metadefender.opswat.com.
[7] Skylight Cyber | Cylance, I Kill You! https :
/ / skylightcyber.com / 2019 / 07 / 18 / cylance - i -
kill-you/.
[8] VirSCAN.org - Free Multi-Engine Online Virus Scanner.
https://www.virscan.org/.
[9] VirusTotal. http://www.virustotal.com/.
[10] Brandon Amos, Hamilton Turner, and Jules White. Ap-
plying machine learning classiﬁers to dynamic Android
malware detection at scale. In 2013 9th International
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Con-
ference (IWCMC), July 2013. ISSN: 2376-6506.
[11] Hyrum S. Anderson and Phil Roth. EMBER: An Open
Dataset for Training Static PE Malware Machine Learn-
ing Models. arXiv:1804.04637 [cs], April 2018.
[12] Daniel Arp, Michael Spreitzenbarth, Malte Hübner,
Hugo Gascon, and Konrad Rieck. Drebin: Effective
and Explainable Detection of Android Malware in Your
Pocket. In Proceedings 2014 Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium, San Diego, CA, 2014. In-
ternet Society.
[13] Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Davide Maiorca, Blaine
Nelson, Nedim Šrndi´c, Pavel Laskov, Giorgio Giacinto,
and Fabio Roli. Evasion Attacks against Machine Learn-
ing at Test Time. Advanced Information Systems Engi-
neering, 7908, 2013.
[14] Battista Biggio, Blaine Nelson, and Pavel Laskov. Poi-
soning attacks against support vector machines. In Pro-
ceedings of the 29th International Coference on Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’12,
Edinburgh, Scotland, June 2012. Omnipress.
[15] Battista Biggio, Konrad Rieck, Davide Ariu, Christian
Wressnegger, Igino Corona, Giorgio Giacinto, and Fabio
Roli. Poisoning behavioral malware clustering. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligent
and Security Workshop - AISec ’14, Scottsdale, Arizona,
USA, 2014. ACM Press.
[16] Ricardo J. G. B. Campello, Davoud Moulavi, and Joerg
Sander. Density-Based Clustering Based on Hierarchi-
cal Density Estimates. In Advances in Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, volume 7819. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013.
[17] Nicholas Carlini. Adversarial machine learning read-
ing list. https://nicholas.carlini.com/writing/
2018/adversarial- machine- learning- reading-
list.html, 2020.
[18] Nicholas Carlini, Anish Athalye, Nicolas Papernot,
Wieland Brendel, Jonas Rauber, Dimitris Tsipras,
Ian Goodfellow, Aleksander Madry, and Alexey Ku-
rakin. On Evaluating Adversarial Robustness.
arXiv:1902.06705 [cs, stat], February 2019.
[19] Ero Carrera. erocarrera/peﬁle. https://github.com/
erocarrera/pefile.
[20] Bryant Chen, Wilka Carvalho, Nathalie Baracaldo,
Heiko Ludwig, Benjamin Edwards, Taesung Lee, Ian
Molloy, and Biplav Srivastava. Detecting Backdoor
Attacks on Deep Neural Networks by Activation Clus-
tering. arXiv:1811.03728 [cs, stat], November 2018.
[21] Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, Bo Li, Kimberly Lu, and
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

Dawn Song. Targeted Backdoor Attacks on Deep Learn-
ing Systems Using Data Poisoning. arXiv:1712.05526
[cs], December 2017.
[22] Zheng Leong Chua, Shiqi Shen, Prateek Saxena, and
Zhenkai Liang. Neural Nets Can Learn Function Type
Signatures From Binaries. In USENIX Security Sympo-
sium, 2017.
[23] Gabriela F. Cretu, Angelos Stavrou, Michael E. Locasto,
Salvatore J. Stolfo, and Angelos D. Keromytis. Casting
out Demons: Sanitizing Training Data for Anomaly Sen-
sors. In 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(sp 2008), Oakland, CA, USA, May 2008. IEEE. ISSN:
1081-6011.
[24] Ambra Demontis, Marco Melis, Maura Pintor, Matthew
Jagielski, Battista Biggio, Alina Oprea, Cristina Nita-
Rotaru, and Fabio Roli. Why do adversarial attacks
transfer? explaining transferability of evasion and poi-
soning attacks. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 19), pages 321–338, Santa Clara, CA,
August 2019. USENIX Association.
[25] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian
Szegedy. Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Exam-
ples. arXiv:1412.6572 [cs, stat], December 2014.
[26] Kathrin Grosse, Nicolas Papernot, Praveen Manoharan,
Michael Backes, and Patrick McDaniel. Adversarial Per-
turbations Against Deep Neural Networks for Malware
Classiﬁcation. arXiv:1606.04435 [cs], June 2016.
[27] Kathrin Grosse, Nicolas Papernot, Praveen Manoharan,
Michael Backes, and Patrick McDaniel. Adversarial
Examples for Malware Detection. In Computer Security
– ESORICS 2017, volume 10493. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2017.
[28] Tianyu Gu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg.
BadNets: Identifying Vulnerabilities in the Machine
Learning Model Supply Chain. arXiv:1708.06733 [cs],
August 2017.
[29] Matthew Jagielski, Alina Oprea, Battista Biggio, Chang
Liu, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Bo Li. Manipulating ma-
chine learning: Poisoning attacks and countermeasures
for regression learning. In IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, SP ’18. IEEE CS, 2018.
[30] Alex Kantchelian, Michael Carl Tschantz, Sadia Afroz,
Brad Miller, Vaishaal Shankar, Rekha Bachwani, An-
thony D Joseph, and J Doug Tygar. Better malware
ground truth: Techniques for weighting anti-virus ven-
dor labels. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Workshop on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security, pages 45–56, 2015.
[31] Dhilung Kirat and Giovanni Vigna. MalGene: Auto-
matic Extraction of Malware Analysis Evasion Signa-
ture. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Confer-
ence on Computer and Communications Security - CCS
’15, Denver, Colorado, USA, 2015. ACM Press.
[32] Marius Kloft and Pavel Laskov. Online anomaly detec-
tion under adversarial impact. volume 9 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 405–412, Chia
Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy, 13–15 May 2010. JMLR
Workshop and Conference Proceedings.
[33] Bojan Kolosnjaji, Ambra Demontis, Battista Biggio, Da-
vide Maiorca, Giorgio Giacinto, Claudia Eckert, and
Fabio Roli. Adversarial Malware Binaries: Evading
Deep Learning for Malware Detection in Executables.
In 2018 26th European Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO), September 2018.
[34] Marek Krˇcál, Ondˇrej Švec, Martin Bálek, and Otakar
Jašek. Deep Convolutional Malware Classiﬁers Can
Learn from Raw Executables and Labels Only. ICLR
2018, February 2018.
[35] Ram Shankar Siva Kumar, Magnus Nyström, John Lam-
bert, Andrew Marshall, Mario Goertzel, Andi Comis-
soneru, Matt Swann, and Sharon Xia. Adversarial ma-
chine learning–industry perspectives. 3rd Deep Learn-
ing and Security Workshop (DLS), 2020.
[36] Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isola-
tion Forest. In 2008 Eighth IEEE International Confer-
ence on Data Mining, December 2008.
[37] Kang Liu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg.
Fine-Pruning: Defending Against Backdooring Attacks
on Deep Neural Networks. arXiv:1805.12185 [cs], May
2018.
[38] Yingqi Liu, Shiqing Ma, Yousra Aafer, Wen-Chuan Lee,
Juan Zhai, Weihang Wang, and Xiangyu Zhang. Trojan-
ing Attack on Neural Networks. In Proceedings 2018
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
San Diego, CA, 2018. Internet Society.
[39] Scott M. Lundberg, Gabriel Erion, Hugh Chen, Alex
DeGrave, Jordan M. Prutkin, Bala Nair, Ronit Katz,
Jonathan Himmelfarb, Nisha Bansal, and Su-In Lee.
From local explanations to global understanding with
explainable AI for trees. Nature Machine Intelligence,
2(1), January 2020.
[40] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Uniﬁed Approach
to Interpreting Model Predictions. In I. Guyon, U. V .
Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vish-
wanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 30. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2017.
[41] Thomas Mandl, Ulrich Bayer, and Florian Nentwich.
ANUBIS ANalyzing Unknown BInarieS The automatic
Way. In Virus bulletin conference, volume 1, page 02,
2009.
[42] Enrico Mariconti, Lucky Onwuzurike, Panagiotis Andri-
otis, Emiliano De Cristofaro, Gordon Ross, and Gianluca
Stringhini. MaMaDroid: Detecting Android Malware by
Building Markov Chains of Behavioral Models. In Pro-
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

ceedings 2017 Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium, San Diego, CA, 2017. Internet Society.
[43] Luis Muñoz-González, Battista Biggio, Ambra Demon-
tis, Andrea Paudice, Vasin Wongrassamee, Emil C.
Lupu, and Fabio Roli. Towards Poisoning of Deep
Learning Algorithms with Back-gradient Optimization.
arXiv:1708.08689 [cs], August 2017.
[44] J. Newsome, B. Karp, and D. Song. Polygraph: auto-
matically generating signatures for polymorphic worms.
In 2005 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S
P’05), May 2005. ISSN: 2375-1207.
[45] James Newsome, Brad Karp, and Dawn Song. Para-
graph: Thwarting Signature Learning by Training Ma-
liciously. In Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection ,
volume 4219. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2006. Series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science.
[46] R. Perdisci, D. Dagon, Wenke Lee, P. Fogla, and
M. Sharif. Misleading worm signature generators using
deliberate noise injection. In 2006 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (S&P’06), Berkeley/Oakland, CA,
2006. IEEE.
[47] Fabio Pierazzi, Feargus Pendlebury, Jacopo Cortellazzi,
and Lorenzo Cavallaro. Intriguing Properties of Adver-
sarial ML Attacks in the Problem Space. In 2020 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Francisco,
CA, USA, May 2020. IEEE.
[48] Edward Raff, Jon Barker, Jared Sylvester, Robert Bran-
don, Bryan Catanzaro, and Charles Nicholas. Malware
Detection by Eating a Whole EXE. arXiv:1710.09435
[cs, stat], October 2017.
[49] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. "Why Should I Trust You?": Explaining the
Predictions of Any Classiﬁer. InProceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining - KDD ’16, San Francisco,
California, USA, 2016. ACM Press.
[50] Konrad Rieck, Philipp Trinius, Carsten Willems, and
Thorsten Holz. Automatic analysis of malware behavior
using machine learning. Journal of Computer Security,
19(4), 2011.
[51] Benjamin I.P. Rubinstein, Blaine Nelson, Ling Huang,
Anthony D. Joseph, Shing-hon Lau, Satish Rao, Nina
Taft, and J. D. Tygar. ANTIDOTE: understanding and
defending against poisoning of anomaly detectors. In
Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM conference on
Internet measurement conference - IMC ’09, Chicago,
Illinois, USA, 2009. ACM Press.
[52] Igor Santos, Felix Brezo, Xabier Ugarte-Pedrero, and
Pablo G. Bringas. Opcode sequences as representation
of executables for data-mining-based unknown malware
detection. Information Sciences, 231, May 2013.
[53] Joshua Saxe and Konstantin Berlin. Deep neural net-
work based malware detection using two dimensional
binary program features. In 2015 10th International
Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software (MAL-
WARE), October 2015. ISSN: null.
[54] Giorgio Severi, Tim Leek, and Brendan Dolan-Gavitt.
Malrec: Compact full-trace malware recording for retro-
spective deep analysis. In Detection of Intrusions and
Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment, volume 10885,
Cham, 2018. Springer International Publishing.
[55] Ali Shafahi, W. Ronny Huang, Mahyar Najibi, Octavian
Suciu, Christoph Studer, Tudor Dumitras, and Tom Gold-
stein. Poison Frogs! Targeted Clean-Label Poisoning
Attacks on Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, April 2018.
[56] Andrii Shalaginov, Sergii Banin, Ali Dehghantanha, and
Katrin Franke. Machine Learning Aided Static Malware
Analysis: A Survey and Tutorial. In Ali Dehghantanha,
Mauro Conti, and Tooska Dargahi, editors,Cyber Threat
Intelligence, volume 70. Springer International Publish-
ing, Cham, 2018.
[57] Charles Smutz and Angelos Stavrou. Malicious PDF
detection using metadata and structural features. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Computer Security Ap-
plications Conference on - ACSAC ’12, Orlando, Florida,
2012. ACM Press.
[58] Nedim Srndic and Pavel Laskov. Practical Evasion of a
Learning-Based Classiﬁer: A Case Study. In2014 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, San Jose, CA, May
2014. IEEE.
[59] Octavian Suciu, Scott E. Coull, and Jeffrey Johns. Ex-
ploring Adversarial Examples in Malware Detection. In
2019 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), San
Francisco, CA, USA, May 2019. IEEE.
[60] Octavian Suciu, Radu Ma, Tudor Dumitras, and
Hal Daume Iii. When Does Machine Learning FAIL?
Generalized Transferability for Evasion and Poisoning
Attacks. 2018.
[61] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi
Yan. Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks.
arXiv:1703.01365 [cs], June 2017.
[62] Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever,
Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow, and Rob
Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks.
arXiv:1312.6199 [cs], December 2013.
[63] Kimberly Tam, Salahuddin J. Khan, Aristide Fattori,
and Lorenzo Cavallaro. CopperDroid: Automatic Re-
construction of Android Malware Behaviors. Internet
Society, 2015.
[64] Brandon Tran, Jerry Li, and Aleksander M ˛ adry. Spec-
tral signatures in backdoor attacks. In Proceedings of
the 32nd International Conference on Neural Informa-
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

tion Processing Systems, NIPS’18, Montréal, Canada,
December 2018. Curran Associates Inc.
[65] Alexander Turner, Dimitris Tsipras, and Aleksander
M ˛ adry. Clean-Label Backdoor Attacks. Manuscript
submitted for publication, 2019.
[66] Shobha Venkataraman, Avrim Blum, and Dawn Song.
Limits of Learning-based Signature Generation with
Adversaries. In 16th Annual Network & Distributed
System Security Symposium Proceedings, 2008.
[67] Bolun Wang, Yuanshun Yao, Shawn Shan, Huiying Li,
Bimal Viswanath, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y . Zhao. Neu-
ral Cleanse: Identifying and Mitigating Backdoor At-
tacks in Neural Networks. In 2019 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA,
May 2019. IEEE.
[68] Huang Xiao, Battista Biggio, Gavin Brown, Giorgio
Fumera, Claudia Eckert, and Fabio Roli. Is Feature
Selection Secure against Training Data Poisoning? In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
[69] Weilin Xu, Yanjun Qi, and David Evans. Automati-
cally Evading Classiﬁers: A Case Study on PDF Mal-
ware Classiﬁers. In Proceedings 2016 Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium, San Diego, CA,
2016. Internet Society.
[70] Wei Yang, Deguang Kong, Tao Xie, and Carl A. Gunter.
Malware Detection in Adversarial Settings: Exploiting
Feature Evolutions and Confusions in Android Apps.
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference on - ACSAC 2017 , Orlando,
FL, USA, 2017. ACM Press.
A Additional Results
Feature LightGBM EmberNN
major_image_version 1704 14
major_linker_version 15 13
major_operating_system_version 38078 8
minor_image_version 1506 12
minor_linker_version 15 6
minor_operating_system_version 5 4
minor_subsystem_version 5 20
MZ_count 626 384
num_read_and_execute_sections 20 66
num_unnamed_sections 11 6
num_write_sections 41 66
num_zero_size_sections 17 17
paths_count 229 18
registry_count 0 33
size 1202385 817664
timestamp 1315281300 1479206400
urls_count 279 141
Table 4: Watermarks for LightGBM and EmberNN used dur-
ing feasibility testing.
Dataset Label Result Count
Original
Goodware Dynamic Benign 100
Dynamic Malicious 0
Malware Dynamic Benign 7
Dynamic Malicious 93
LightGBM
Goodware
Failed 25
Dynamic Benign 75
Dynamic Malicious 0
Malware
Failed 23
Dynamic Benign 30
Dynamic Malicious 47
EmberNN
Goodware
Failed 33
Dynamic Benign 67
Dynamic Malicious 0
Malware
Failed 33
Dynamic Benign 23
Dynamic Malicious 44
Table 5: Summary of results analyzing a random sample
of 100 watermarked goodware and malware samples in the
dynamic analysis environment.
Here the reader will ﬁnd additional details on the experi-
mental results and feature analysis that help providing a gen-
eral idea on the effectiveness and feasibility of the studied
attacks.
A.1 Attack Results
Table 6, Table 7, and Table 8 report additional experimental
results for the multiple runs of the attack with different strate-
gies. All the attacks were repeated for 5 times and the tables
report average results.
A.2 Feasible Backdoor Trigger
With our watermarking utility we were able to control 17
features with relative ease. Table 4 shows the feature-value
mappings for two example backdoor triggers computed on the
LightGBM and EmberNN models, which we fed to the static
and dynamic analyzers to gauge the level of label retention
after the adversarial modiﬁcation. Table 5 summarizes the
results of the dynamic analyzer over 100 randomly sampled
benign and malicious executables from the EMBER dataset.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

Table 6: LargeAbsSHAP x CountAbsSHAP - All features. Average percentage over 5 runs.
Trigger Size Poisoned
Points
Acc(Fb,Xb) Acc(Fb,X) FPb
4 1500 65.8713 98.6069 0.0114
4 3000 55.8789 98.5995 0.0116
4 6000 40.3358 98.6081 0.0116
4 12000 20.1088 98.6060 0.0118
8 1500 30.8596 98.6335 0.0114
8 3000 10.1038 98.6212 0.0115
8 6000 2.8231 98.6185 0.0116
8 12000 0.0439 98.5975 0.0121
16 1500 2.4942 98.6379 0.0114
16 3000 0.9899 98.6185 0.0114
16 6000 0.0205 98.5948 0.0116
16 12000 0.0138 98.6323 0.0117
LightGBM
Trigger Size Poisoned
Points
Acc(Fb,Xb) Acc(Fb,X) FPb
16 3000 21.0122 99.0832 0.0073
16 6000 36.7591 99.0499 0.0082
16 12000 53.8470 99.0729 0.0079
32 3000 13.2336 99.0608 0.0078
32 6000 20.3952 99.1152 0.0070
32 12000 28.3413 99.0856 0.0074
64 3000 5.8046 99.0723 0.0084
64 6000 11.1986 99.0959 0.0078
64 12000 11.5547 99.0998 0.0070
128 3000 2.4067 99.0810 0.0075
128 6000 1.6841 99.0688 0.0075
128 12000 2.8298 99.1088 0.0074
EmberNN
Table 7: LargeAbsSHAP x MinPopulation - All features. Average percentage over 5 runs.
Trigger Size Poisoned
Points
Acc(Fb,Xb) Acc(Fb,X) FPb
4 1500 62.3211 98.5985 0.0115
4 3000 52.5933 98.6144 0.0114
4 6000 30.8696 98.6044 0.0116
4 12000 20.3445 98.5836 0.0118
8 1500 32.0446 98.6128 0.0114
8 3000 20.5850 98.6159 0.0115
8 6000 14.9360 98.6087 0.0115
8 12000 1.9214 98.6037 0.0117
16 1500 4.3328 98.6347 0.0114
16 3000 1.4490 98.6073 0.0115
16 6000 0.1670 98.6301 0.0115
16 12000 0.0026 98.6169 0.0118
LightGBM
Trigger Size Poisoned
Points
Acc(Fb,Xb) Acc(Fb,X) FPb
16 3000 18.8691 99.1219 0.0074
16 6000 33.5211 99.0958 0.0079
16 12000 50.6499 99.0942 0.0080
32 3000 9.1183 99.1189 0.0075
32 6000 12.1103 99.0827 0.0078
32 12000 14.6766 99.1127 0.0071
64 3000 3.4980 99.1170 0.0075
64 6000 6.2418 99.1234 0.0072
64 12000 6.8627 99.0941 0.0075
128 3000 0.9514 99.0675 0.0082
128 6000 1.6012 99.0824 0.0082
128 12000 1.6200 99.0816 0.0074
EmberNN
Table 8: Greedy Combined Feature and Value Selector - All features. Average percentage over 5 runs.
Trigger Size Poisoned
Points
Acc(Fb,Xb) Acc(Fb,X) FPb
4 1500 63.3370 98.5976 0.0113
4 3000 60.6706 98.6320 0.0114
4 6000 54.3283 98.6211 0.0114
4 12000 40.2437 98.6099 0.0118
8 1500 49.5246 98.6290 0.0113
8 3000 37.3295 98.6153 0.0113
8 6000 23.6785 98.6147 0.0117
8 12000 17.7914 98.6282 0.0117
16 1500 0.8105 98.6195 0.0113
16 3000 0.6968 98.6170 0.0115
16 6000 0.0565 98.6241 0.0116
16 12000 0.0329 98.6173 0.0118
LightGBM
Trigger Size Poisoned
Points
Acc(Fb,Xb) Acc(Fb,X) FPb
16 3000 11.6613 99.1014 0.0082
16 6000 11.0876 99.1105 0.0078
16 12000 10.5981 99.0958 0.0079
32 3000 4.8025 99.0747 0.0087
32 6000 5.0524 99.1167 0.0082
32 12000 4.4665 99.1335 0.0072
64 3000 1.9074 99.1012 0.0076
64 6000 1.8246 99.0989 0.0077
64 12000 1.8364 99.1117 0.0071
128 3000 0.7356 99.0926 0.0082
128 6000 0.7596 99.1219 0.0080
128 12000 0.7586 99.1014 0.0072
EmberNN
18